kata containers enhancement proposal (#366)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/kata-containers/kata-containers-dev-preview.md

---
title: kata-containers-dev-preview
authors:
  - "@aadam"
reviewers:
  - "@mpatel"
approvers:
  - "@mpatel"
creation-date: 2020-06-07
last-updated: 2020-06-07
status: implementable
see-also:
  - TBD
replaces:
  - TBD
superseded-by:
  - TBD
---

# Kata Containers

## Summary

> Kata containers is an open source project developing a container runtime using virtual machines and providing the same look and feel as with vanilla containers.

Reviewer: Add link to Kata Containers project for easier review.

Reviewer 2: done

> Kata containers is an open source project developing a container runtime using virtual machines and providing the same look and feel as with vanilla containers.

Reviewer 2: fixed, thank you!

> Kata containers is an open source project developing a container runtime using virtual machines and providing the same look and feel as with vanilla containers.

Reviewer 2: done

> Kata containers is an open source project developing a container runtime using virtual machines and providing the same look and feel as with vanilla containers.

Reviewer: I hope you did not carry over my typo (fill instead of feel)

> By leveraging hardware virtualization technologies kata containers provides powerful workload isolation compared to existing container solutions.

Reviewer 2: done

- **RuntimeClass** - see https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/containers/runtime-class/

## Goals
- Provide a way to enable running user workloads on kata containers on an OpenShift cluster.
- Clusters with kata container workloads should support upgrades.
- Add security policy to control which users can run what workloads on kata in an OpenShift cluster.

## Non-goals
- Although kata containers are capable of supporting running a different kernel then the one used on the Openshift node, such features will not be supported. This is in order to simplify the development cycles and testing efforts of this project.
- Running OpenShift control plane and core operators on kata. These will continue to run on runc.

## Kata containers architecture

For details on the kata architecture see https://github.com/kata-containers/documentation/blob/master/design/architecture.md

## Proposal - main development efforts
### Overview
Kubernetes provides support for RuntimeClasses. RuntimeClass is a feature for selecting the container runtime configuration. The container runtime configuration is used to run a Pod’s containers.

> CRI-O today comes out of the box with a runc as the default runtime. CRI-O also supports RUntimeClasses and using this configuration, it will support a KataContainers runtime as well.

Reviewer 3: nit: `s/RUntimeClasses/RuntimeClasses/`

Reviewer 2: fixed, thank you!

The next sections detailed the 2 solutions.

### KataContainer Packaging
#### Short term (preview release): Use container images to deliver RPMs and install using rpm-ostree
In this option we build a container image containing RHEL AV RPMs (such as QEMU) and kata RPMs. The kata operator will create a pod based on this image and then mount the host filesystem and install the RPMs on the filesystem (kata operators will be described in a later section).

**Pros:**
1. The RPMs can be installed only by the users who would be interested in using the kata runtime
2. There's no extra work related to properly loading qemu-kiwi dependencies, as all the packages would be in installed in the same PATH its build was intent for
3. QEMU RPMs have been tested / validated using an identical environment
4. No additional work with regarding to re-packaging those in another form other than the RPMs which is the way they are consumed by other Layered Products

**Cons:**
1. ~200 mb extra, installed in the host, for those who'd be using kata runtime
2. Updates / Removal may be more complicated than having the RPMs as part of machine-os-content

> #### Long term: Use RHCOS extensions (qemu-kiwi and dependencies only)

Reviewer 3: This section looks like a copy/paste from https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/317

Could this be re-written to just link to that enhancement and instead focus this section on what packages would be supplied in the extension for kata containers?

Reviewer: Please update that section to indicate what we would put in the extension.

Do we want to discuss the reduced qemu package here?

Reviewer 2: changed it, thank you!

**Pros:**
1. RHEL-AV depends on libraries and other tools which are all available as RPMs. Turning this into a static image instead of RPMs creates a huge single binary which we avoid with extensions
2. RHEL-AV has been tested / validated as RPMs and not a single binary which means we saves the extra overhead
3. RHEL-AV RPMs can be installed only by the customers who would be interested in using the kata runtime. QEMU (and its dependencies) get updated as part of the machine-os-content updates
4. There's no extra work related to properly loading qemu-kiwi dependencies, as all the packages would be installed in the same PATH its build in
5. Better control of the versions that are installed both for qemu (specific version for a given host) and for the dependencies (tracked by rpm)

**Cons:**
1. ~20 mb extra, installed in the host, for those who'd be using kata runtime
2. machine-os-content would still carry this until there is a separate machine-os-content- extensions container

> This approach has a dependency on the extensions framework being delivered into Openshift.

Reviewer 3: The RHCOS extensions framework was successfully delivered in 4.6; this statement could be dropped.

Reviewer 2: dropped, thank you!

Via the CR it will be possible to select a subset of worker nodes. For deploying binaries on the host the current idea is to use a container image that can be mounted on the host level.  The goal is to be able to install the operator via OperatorHub. The operator will also create a crio drop-in config file via machine config objects. The Operator will automatically select the payload image that contains correct version of the kata binaries for the given version of the OpenShift. The Operator will also configure a `RuntimeClass` called `kata` which can be used to deploy workload that uses kata runtime. The operator will create a machine-config object to enable the `qemu-kiwi` RHCOS extension.

The `RuntimeClass` and payload image names will be visible in the CR status.

#### Goals
- Create an API which supports installation of Kata Runtime on all or selected worker nodes
- Configure CRI-O to use Kata Runtime on those worker nodes
- Installation of the runtimeClass on the cluster
- Updates the Kata runtime

> - Uninstall Kata Runtime and reconfigure CRI-O to not use it.

Reviewer: Add a reference to base scheduling metrics?

Reviewer 2: @c3d Not sure what you'd like to see. Do you have one for me?

Reviewer: I would add something like
`- Provide usable CPU, memory, disk and network metrics to the scheduler`

WDYT?

Reviewer 4: @c3d, this is not necessarily the responsibility of Kata Containers, nor necessarily CRI-O or kubelet.  I'd argue against adding it, unless we have the full buy-in of the monitoring team to support those.

IMHO, adding this may actually increase the chance to have the addition blocked than anything else.

/cc @zanetworker

Reviewer 2: I agree with you on this one @fidencio

Reviewer: I agree with you both on the responsibilities. That is not my point however, nor is it the point of this section. The section describes the "Goals" of the operator, from the OpenShift perspective. I still believe that these goals should include adding whatever other configuration is needed for the orchestration layer to do its job. That includes metrics, pod overhead computations, and possibly other fine details that I'm sure we have not really covered yet.

What about extending the "Installation of the runtimeClass" bullet as follows:

```
- Installation of the runtimeClass on the cluster, as well as of the required components for the runtime to be controlled by the orchestration layer.
```

Come to think of it, this rewording is also necessary to describe the installation of the virtualization components.

Reviewer 2: Made the change as suggested by @c3d

3. RHEL-AV RPMs can be installed only by the customers who would be interested in using the kata runtime. QEMU (and its dependencies) get updated as part of the machine-os-content updates
4. There's no extra work related to properly loading qemu-kvm-core dependencies, as all the packages would be installed in the same PATH its build in
5. Better control of the versions that are installed both for qemu (specific version for a given host) and for the dependencies (tracked by rpm)

**Cons:**
1. ~75 mb extra, installed in the host, for those who'd be using kata runtime
2. machine-os-content would still carry this until there is a separate machine-os-content- extensions container

This approach has a dependency on the extensions framework being delivered into Openshift.

### KataContainer Operator development 
The goal is to develop a kata operator that can be used to manage the entire lifecycle of kata components in an OpenShift cluster. We will have a controller that watches for a kata custom resource and a daemon-set that acts upon changes to the CR and do the required work on the worker nodes (install, uninstall update,...). 

> Via the CR it will be possible to select a subset of worker nodes, an image that contains all the binaries and optionally the name of the runtime class (If the runtime class is not defined, the name of the CR is used to create a runtime class configuration in crio). For deploying binaries on the host the current idea is to use a container image that can be mounted on the host level.  The goal is to be able to install the operator via OperatorHub. The operator will also create a crio drop-in config file via machine config objects. 

Reviewer 5: We should revise this line to match the API design where we said that users won't be able to pick the image or the runtime Class name. Both of those will be visible as part of status instead. cc: @harche

Author: Fixed.

> Via the CR it will be possible to select a subset of worker nodes, an image that contains all the binaries and optionally the name of the runtime class (If the runtime class is not defined, the name of the CR is used to create a runtime class configuration in crio). For deploying binaries on the host the current idea is to use a container image that can be mounted on the host level.  The goal is to be able to install the operator via OperatorHub. The operator will also create a crio drop-in config file via machine config objects. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Via the CR it will be possible to select a subset of worker nodes. For deploying binaries on the host the current idea is to use a container image that can be mounted on the host level.  The goal is to be able to install the operator via OperatorHub. The operator will also create a crio drop-in config file via machine config objects. The Operator will automatically select the payload image that contains correct version of the kata binaries for the given version of the OpenShift. The Operator will also configure a `RuntimeClass` called `kata-oc` which can be used to deploy workload that uses kata runtime. 

The `RuntimeClass` and payload image names will be visible in the CR status. 
```

Reviewer 6: @mrunalp @ariel-adam please review.

Author: Fixed.

#### Goals

> - Create an API which supports,

Reviewer 5: This line should be merged with the next line.

Author: Fixed.

- Installation of Kata Runtime on all or selected worker nodes

> - Configure the CRI Runtime, such as CRI-O, to use Kata Runtime on those worker nodes

Reviewer 5: Limit to just CRI-O instead of any CRI runtime.

Author: Fixed.

- Installation of the runtimeClass on the cluster

> - Perform updates to the Kata runtime

Reviewer 5: `Update the kata runtime`

Author: Fixed.
